fix: Rehaul-Migrate-from-Multi-Container-K8s (#655)
appsmithorg/appsmith-docs: website/docs/getting-started/setup/installation-guides/kubernetes/migrate-k8s.md

---
description: Follow the steps in the guide to migrate the multi-container Kubernetes Appsmith installation to Single Container Helm chart installation.

---

> # Migrate from Multi Container to Single Container

Author: I kept it as it's also indexed on Google.

> # Migrate from Multi Container to Single Container

Author: As discussed - kept the same title as 'Migrate from multi-container setup (k8s)'

 Migrating from a multi-container Kubernetes installation to a single-container Helm deployment can provide several benefits, including easier management and increased efficiency. You can make the transition and migrate your Appsmith deployment from the old stack (multiple pods/containers) Kubernetes to Helm chart(single container). The guide below covers the steps to help you successfully migrate to the Helm chart and works well with the default Kubernetes installation. 

> Use the `kubectl get all` command to review the default Kubernetes installation resources. You can see the output similar to the one shown below:

Author: Done

    APPSMITH_CLIENT_LOG_LEVEL: ""
    APPSMITH_GOOGLE_MAPS_API_KEY: "false"
    APPSMITH_MAIL_ENABLED: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_HOST: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_PORT: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_USERNAME: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_PASSWORD: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_FROM: ""
    APPSMITH_REPLY_TO: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_SMTP_AUTH: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_SMTP_TLS_ENABLED: ""
    APPSMITH_DISABLE_TELEMETRY: "false"
    APPSMITH_RECAPTCHA_SITE_KEY: ""
    APPSMITH_RECAPTCHA_SECRET_KEY: ""
    APPSMITH_RECAPTCHA_ENABLED: "false"
    APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI: "mongodb://root:root@mongo-service/appsmith"
    APPSMITH_REDIS_URL: "redis://redis-service:6379"
    APPSMITH_ENCRYPTION_PASSWORD: "rmEOM1TxTRxit"
    APPSMITH_ENCRYPTION_SALT: "Jhj1IyFcpKYUK"
    APPSMITH_CUSTOM_DOMAIN: ""
    ```

### Configure parameters

In the old Kubernetes stack, MongoDB was deployed as a separate resource in the cluster. However, in the new Helm chart, MongoDB is an internal service and is configured as a ReplicaSet. To ensure that the Helm chart runs with internal Redis and MongoDB services, you need to make some changes to the `values.yaml` file. Follow the steps below to configure internal Redis and MongoDB services.

>   1. Change the host for `APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI` from `mongo-service` to `localhost`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Change the host in the `APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI` parameter from `mongo-service` to `localhost`:
```

job.batch/imago-27473940   1/1           16s        12m
```

## Prerequisites

Before you start the migration process, ensure that the below prerequisites are met.

> 1. Install `kubectl` - `kubectl` is the command-line interface for Kubernetes. It allows you to run commands against Kubernetes clusters to manage applications and other resources. To install kubectl, follow the instructions for your platform from the official [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/vi/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/).

Author: Pending, will raise a separate PR for this.

 2. Once `kubectl` is installed, configure it to connect to your cluster. Follow one of the available guides below for your platform: 
     * Minikube: [Setup Kubectl](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/handbook/kubectl/)
     * Google Cloud Kubernetes: [Configuring cluster access for kubectl](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/cluster-access-for-kubectl)
     * AWS EKS: [Create a kubeconfig for Amazon EKS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/create-kubeconfig.html)
     * Microk8s: Set up Kubernetes by following [working with kubectl](https://microk8s.io/docs/working-with-kubectl).
3. Install `yq` package: [yq package](https://github.com/mikefarah/yq#install) is needed to format data from the `ConfigMap` resources into a `.yaml` file referenced in migration configurations.

> ## Migrate multi container to single container

Author: Migrate to single container

> ## Migrate multi container to single container

Author: Done

Migrating from a multi-container Kubernetes installation to a new cluster involves exporting your data and configuration, setting up the new cluster, and migrating your applications and services to the new environment. Here are the steps to do this:

> ### Export old Kubernetes database

Author: > d these steps be numbered as they have to be done in an order?

The headings are independent of each other so users can take export of db and configuration

> ### Export old Kubernetes database

Reviewer: But still the other steps after exporting configuration can/should be after the first two right?  For this I think we will skip numbering the main steps for now. We will revisit it later if it causes any confusion

Export data from the existing `MongoDB` pod and download the archive file to your local. Follow the steps below to backup database:

>   1. Create `backup` directory in `MongoDB` pod.

Author: I'll check about roman numerals in Markdown.

   ```
  3. Copy archive file from MongoDB pod to your local.

      ```bash
      kubectl cp mongo-statefulset-0:data/db/backup/appsmith-data.archive appsmith-data.archive
      ```
  4. Verify that a local `archive` file is created that stores the data of the existing `MongoDB` service in Kubernetes.

      ```bash
      ls | grep appsmith-data.archive

      appsmith-data.archive
      ```

### Export old Kubernetes configuration

Export all existing configurations from the `ConfigMap` in the running Kubernetes system and migrate them into the `values.yaml` file.

  1. Retrieve all configurations data from `ConfigMap` and write into a file with `yaml` format (`configuration.yaml`).

   ```bash
      kubectl get cm application-config -o "jsonpath={.data}" | yq e -P -I 2 >> configuration.yaml \
      && kubectl get cm mongo-config -o "jsonpath={.data}" | yq e -P -I 2 >> configuration.yaml \
      && kubectl get cm encryption-config -o "jsonpath={.data}" | yq e -P -I 2 >> configuration.yaml
   ```
  2. Download the `values.yaml` template of the Helm chart.

      ```bash
      curl -o values.yaml https://bit.ly/3ETEgPT 
      ```

>   3.  Manually copy data from `configuration.yaml` to the section `applicationConfig` of the `values.yaml`.

Author: Okay.

>   3.  Manually copy data from `configuration.yaml` to the section `applicationConfig` of the `values.yaml`.

Reviewer: I don't this was updated after the first round of review. so keeping this unresolved

>   3.  Manually copy data from `configuration.yaml` to the section `applicationConfig` of the `values.yaml`.

Reviewer: @jnikhila let's add this

    ![Manually copy data from values.yaml file](/img/helm-values-mapping.png)

  4. Verify the `applicationConfig` section in the `values.yaml`:

    ```yaml
    applicationConfig:
    APPSMITH_OAUTH2_GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID: ""
    APPSMITH_OAUTH2_GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET: ""
    APPSMITH_OAUTH2_GITHUB_CLIENT_ID: ""
    APPSMITH_OAUTH2_GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET: ""
    APPSMITH_FORM_LOGIN_DISABLED: "false"
    APPSMITH_SIGNUP_DISABLED: "true"
    APPSMITH_CLIENT_LOG_LEVEL: ""
    APPSMITH_GOOGLE_MAPS_API_KEY: "false"
    APPSMITH_MAIL_ENABLED: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_HOST: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_PORT: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_USERNAME: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_PASSWORD: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_FROM: ""
    APPSMITH_REPLY_TO: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_SMTP_AUTH: ""
    APPSMITH_MAIL_SMTP_TLS_ENABLED: ""
    APPSMITH_DISABLE_TELEMETRY: "false"
    APPSMITH_RECAPTCHA_SITE_KEY: ""
    APPSMITH_RECAPTCHA_SECRET_KEY: ""
    APPSMITH_RECAPTCHA_ENABLED: "false"
    APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI: "mongodb://root:root@mongo-service/appsmith"
    APPSMITH_REDIS_URL: "redis://redis-service:6379"
    APPSMITH_ENCRYPTION_PASSWORD: "rmEOM1TxTRxit"
    APPSMITH_ENCRYPTION_SALT: "Jhj1IyFcpKYUK"
    APPSMITH_CUSTOM_DOMAIN: ""
    ```

> ### Configure values.yaml

Author: Configure Parameters

In the old Kubernetes stack, MongoDB was deployed as a separate resource in the cluster. However, in the new Helm chart, MongoDB is an internal service and is configured as a ReplicaSet. To ensure that the Helm chart runs with internal Redis and MongoDB services, you need to make some changes to the `values.yaml` file. Follow the steps below to configure internal Redis and MongoDB services.

>   1. Change the host for `APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI`.

Author: Okay.

>    From `mongo-service`:

Author: Okay.

  ```bash old
    APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI: "mongodb://root:root@mongo-service/appsmith"
  ```
  
  To `localhost`:

>   ```bash new

Author: Okay.

    APPSMITH_MONGODB_URI: "mongodb://root:root@localhost/appsmith"
  ```

>   2. Remove query parameter in the URI if they exist.

Reviewer: Let's  combine this point in the first one one as suggested in the quoted content above.

>   3. Add additional configuration for `MongoDB`.

Author: okay.

>   3. Add additional configuration for `MongoDB`.

Reviewer: This has not been updated

      1. Add `APPSMITH_MONGODB_USER` that stores the username
      2. Add `APPSMITH_MONGODB_PASSWORD` that stores the password

>   4. Change the host for `Redis URL`.

Reviewer: Let's please make this update

        APPSMITH_CUSTOM_DOMAIN: ""
        APPSMITH_MONGODB_USER: "root"
        APPSMITH_MONGODB_PASSWORD: "root"
```

### Install Helm chart
Follow the below steps to install helm chart with old configuration:

  1. Add Helm repository

      ```bash
      helm repo add appsmith https://helm.appsmith.com
      ```

  2. Update repository

      ```bash
      helm repo update
      ```

  3. Remove `Imago` resources: `Imago` is a auto update tool for Kubernetes, this tool is set up in both context of old Kubernetes stack & Helm chart. Therefore, it may occur a conflict in deploying Helm chart with existing `Imago` service account & cronjob. Removing it from old Kubernetes context is necessary:

      ```bash
      kubectl delete sa,cronjob imago
      ```

>   4. Install Appsmith Helm chart

Author: Okay

>   4. Install Appsmith Helm chart

Author: Done

    ```bash
      kubectl exec -it appsmith-0 -- appsmithctl import_db
    ```

 You see a message - `Importing this DB will erase this data. Are you sure you want to proceed`, where you can respond with `y`. It's safe in this situation since the new database in the new setup only contains initial data and should be safe to be overwritten.

4. Verify that Helm chart still works after importing and the data from old Kubernetes stack also shows up in the Helm chart

## Migrate SSL certificate
You may want to migrate existing SSL certificate to the new Helm chart. With the old Kubernetes stack & new Helm chart, Kubernetes cluster uses [`cert-manager`](https://cert-manager.io/) to provision the SSL certificate. `cert-manager` is an `Automate certificate manager` that provisions and manages the certificates itself => Backward incompatible if migrating certificate from one `cert-manager` to another one.

It's recommended that after migrating to the Helm chart, you can follow the document [Setup Https](https://github.com/appsmithorg/appsmith/blob/release/deploy/helm/Setup-https.md) to setup a new `cert-manager` and provision a new certificate for Helm installation.

> ## Test Appsmith

Author: Done

> After the chart has been deployed to the Kubernetes cluster, it's important to test the Appsmith application to ensure it's functioning as expected in the new Helm-based deployment. This may involve running a series of integration tests, or simply verifying that the application is accessible and responding to requests as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the chart has been deployed to the Kubernetes cluster, it's important to test that the migration is successful by checking that the Application application is functioning as expected in the new Helm-based deployment. This may involve running a series of integration tests, or simply verifying that the application is accessible and responding to requests as expected.
```

> ## Rollback

Reviewer: This should be 'Troubleshooting'

Author: Do we need heading Troubleshooting or just keep it as the sentence as we discussed for other docs?

Author: Done

> If any issues are encountered during the migration process or while testing the Appsmith Helm installation, it may be necessary to roll back to the previous multi-container Kubernetes installation. You can start using the old Kubernetes stacks as it's not removed and is available.

Reviewer: Also mention that usually line about support and Discord etc..

Author: Done
